---
title: "My Balance of Personal Projects and Travel"
layout: post
date: 2016-06-26
tag:
writings3: true
show-info: true
show-title: true
---
*Panama City, Panama*

I've noticed a marked change in the balance between travel and work throughout this trip. To be clear, I have not done any work for money or an employer on this trip; the work I'm referring to is purely personal project based. Forever a “list person”, I’ve been able to see this change through the lists and schedules I’ve made throughout our nearly yearlong adventure, strangely enough. At the start, I was concerned with the places we were going. I was making Sticky Note lists of the things I wanted to do or see in the place we were in or about to be in. I was excited for things ahead, particularly Patagonia and Buenos Aires. About a month in, I started making a list on a Sticky Note of the things I wanted to focus on while traveling. These included things like writing a screenplay, reading about the history of the countries we were visiting and, eventually, learning to program. Looking back now, the Sticky Notes represented a time when I was not intending to go home any time soon. I wasn’t too concerned with implementing longer-term habits or with keeping any sort of permanent record of progress. I wrote them on Sticky Notes, which can’t be backed up and are not easy to format. I didn’t write out dates for when I wanted to accomplish my goals, or any great detail about the tasks. 

When we got to the Workaway, I became more concerned with developing a concrete schedule to accomplish goals. I wrote a list for myself, first of my overall goals I wanted to accomplish while there, and then of a broken-out daily timeline to accomplish these goals. This was the first time I tried to implement a system like this: coming up with things I wanted to accomplish first, and then setting daily times and steps to break them out. I found it hugely successful. I had unknowingly set up an experiment in goal shaping and habit-forming for myself, and the result was positive. Since then, I’ve implemented this same system several times and hope to continue to do so when I’m home.

In Buenos Aires, I started to feel like I needed something more. I was tired of traveling around after a grueling time in Patagonia, but I found that once I actually stayed in one place, I got antsy. I wasn’t able to spend more than a few hours a day working, without either wondering why I was spending my time on this or feeling guilty for not doing more touristy stuff while I was in a foreign place. At the time, I was working on my screenplay. I wasn’t getting paid for my work, and I didn’t anticipate showing it to anyone necessarily. It was just something I had always wanted to do, and that motivated me. Yet still, I wasn’t enjoying the process of writing it and I was less than pleased with the work itself. Visits from parents offered some distractions, and when they were gone, it was clear I needed to change my direction after finishing the screenplay.

In Uruguay, I started my first real personal programming project, my interactive route map. I worked on this a bit during the time of all the visits in Argentina and found it immensely fulfilling – far more enjoyable than working on my screenplay had been. I knew I wanted to focus on programming when I got to Medellín. As time went on, I also decided I wanted to learn more about urban planning via a volunteer opportunity. When this didn’t pan out, I decided to pursue a mix of the two instead – a personal programming and writing project that examined the urban planning efforts in Medellín. To do this, I turned to my newly developed method for accomplishing goals. I laid out exactly what I wanted to do, and some intermediary steps to get the overall goal completed. I then updated my Google calendar to include daily activity breakouts. I also wanted to do other things while in Medellín, such as cook five new meals a week (fully vegetarian), exercise five times a week, review Spanish vocab and grammar flashcards, take an online programming class and find time to see the city. I laid out my days to include blocks for all of these things, at least at some point during the week. I wasn’t sure how long we’d be in Medellín or if I had allocated too much or too little time to specific things, so I gave myself the option to tweak these things if I wanted. That being said, when I made the calendar, my ultimate goal was to try to follow it as closely as possible and to hold myself accountable to it. It was by far the most concrete list I had made on the trip, far more thoroughly implemented than the Stickies I had started with. It was clear I was focusing much more on personal projects and tracking progress than I had been in the beginning, when I was mainly concerned with the places we were going.

Anyway, this system worked immensely well, and I was able to accomplish my main personal project goal before we left Medellín. I also succeeded on the food and workout goals, but fell behind on the Spanish and online class ones. I do think that a major reason for this is that our initial two+ month planned stay in the city got cut to one month, so I’ll give myself some slack on those and maintain that the system worked well for me. At this point in the trip, my list system changed again. I now began thinking of the trip ending, not anytime too soon but sometime in the coming three to four months. With this driving my mindset, I next made a list of things I wanted to accomplish before going home. These were still things I wanted to do while on the trip and they were decently lofty – I was still figuring I had enough time to work on several things. Yet these goals were written with the idea that going home was a reality, not some abstract thing anymore.

But once I finished my Medellín project and we left the city, my drive to work on personal projects and other goals faded a bit. One reason for this is because we began going to places where the wifi was spotty at best, there were few or no cafes to do work in and the hostels weren’t conducive for a work setup. I think I also noticed all this a lot more after Medellín, where I had had an amazing setup with an entire apartment, good wifi and fully free days to do as I pleased. I also felt I had accomplished some major goals there, and was thus able to cross dozens of things I’ve wanted to do off lists I’ve created over the last several years. It felt great to be able to do this, but also a bit daunting to start new things afterward. As things currently stand, I feel a lot less motivated to do the things I had set up in my list when we left Medellín, and won’t be devastated by any means if they don’t all get done. 

I think a major reason for this is a change in mindset. I’ve been thinking more and more about life at home, and am almost getting to the point where I'm ready to return. I’m still excited to see the places that lie ahead for us, but I’m not as enthused about the idea of travel as I once was. Today, rather than write a list about things I want to get done while on the trip, I wrote a list about things I want to focus on when I’m home. These are all things I’ve realized I want to make a priority in my future life while on this trip, so travel is still innately influencing the list. But I think this shift in priorities and goals shows what my mind is focused on - in this case it’s stability and home life rather than travel goals. Who knows what kinds of lists will come next, as we wrap up the last couple months of our adventure.
