---
title: "The End of the Road"
layout: post
date: 2016-09-07
tag:
writings3: true
show-info: true
show-title: true
---

*En Route from Guatemala City, Guatemala to Los Angeles, California*

The time has come – I’m currently on a return flight home from Guatemala City. It feels crazy to write that sentence, considering its implications. I started off on this trip over a year ago, unsure of myself, my decision and what awaited me. I didn’t know how long I’d be gone, if I’d be able to cope for long in lesser-developed countries, how I’d like the constantly-moving pace of travel, what I would do with all my new free time and if I’d be able to spend 24/7 with another person. By the end of the yearlong journey, I had seen 11 new countries and met countless new people. My Spanish had improved immensely, and my eyes were opened to new foods, customs and ways of seeing the world. My idealized view of the United States had quickly worn off – I saw how little interest people had in my country, apart from asking me what I thought of Donald Trump’s most recent antics. That’s not to say I felt hostility toward me for being an American. It’s more that my experiences grounded my self-conception of what my citizenship meant in the eyes of others and in the global scheme of things.

Beyond that, my biggest lesson came in realizing the power of mindfulness and self-reflection. I read a lot while on this trip, and thought a lot about the powerful systems that exist in this world. I also learned as much as I could about the countries we went to, to understand the political, social and historical contexts of where I was. This caused me to think a lot about the fact that what is happening in the world as I know it, from the way food is produced to how our international relations are handled, isn’t necessarily working. Building off that, if it’s not working, why am I not trying to do something about it? Even if that means making an uncomfortable or effortful change to my life, why am I not doing it if I believe it should be done? Travel and my reflections during it have caused me to question the way I operate on a day-to-day basis. I have begun to realize that I am no longer satisfied with being able to meander through life, doing what I’ve always done because, well, it’s what I’ve always done. Travel has made me realize that it’s not worth it to take the easy way out, and that I need to constantly question what I’m doing to ensure I’m not doing that thing just for convenience’s sake. 

In the year that I was gone, I didn’t work and I didn’t make any money. I didn’t attend any formal classes or receive any proper schooling. Yet, I was far more productive and grew leaps and bounds more as a person than I have in any other yearlong period. Not only did I reflect far more on myself, my values and what I want to do with my life, but I also began to develop habits that I hope to sustain in the future. I paid attention to my surroundings and tried to learn from them. I taught myself new skills that have opened doors for how I want to approach the future. I cooked a lot more, significantly advanced my programming and design skills, wrote more, read more and completed several personal projects I never would have had the time to do had I been working full time. I thought about the kind of life I was living prior to this trip, and what I did and didn’t like about it. In the past, I had focused on the things I didn’t like about school, work, life, whatever, but constantly struggled with figuring out a way to assess why I didn’t like them and what I could do about it. While traveling, I got much more clarity in this regard, which created a framework for me to better understand and act on these emotions. Even if that ended up being all I got out of this trip, it would have been worth it.

Of course, I had a lot of fun and saw a lot of cool things along the way. I tried new activities, from paragliding to trekking to scuba diving, and saw beautiful landscapes I hadn’t known existed. I went to regional markets, ate delicious food and talked politics with locals who cared about their cities and country. I withstood harrowing bus journeys through winding mountain roads and sat on boats I wasn’t sure would make the journey without sinking. I worked on a farm for one month, and lived out of a tent in Patagonia the next one. I got lost in new cities, studying their development patterns and urban planning.

From the Workaway we did in Chile, I learned the value of spending time in a natural setting, living cohesively with your environment rather than trying to overtake it. I saw first-hand how much sense it made to grow your own food and to set up a system for yourself where you could live symbiotically with your surroundings. I began to appreciate the value in cooking well, eating things when they were in season and foregoing waste as much as possible. When we trekked through Peru and Chile, I saw how powerful it can be to be active within nature. During these times, I was able to think about things in a whole new light, and was often able to gain entirely new perspectives on things I had never considered while working full time. I realized how fulfilling it is spending time in the great outdoors, and vowed to do more of this back in California. 

On the flipside, I also learned how addicted I was to wifi. Because I had a lot of free time on my hands, I began to develop goals for things I wanted to complete and learn while on the trip. I found great fulfillment out of teaching myself new programming skills via books and classes, creating static and interactive maps, working on my analysis of Medellín’s social urbanism project, writing my blog, learning more about investing and reading various fiction and nonfiction books. I spent a lot of time on my computer to accomplish this, but to be honest, I loved every minute of it. I finally had the time to learn the things I wanted to learn, and to discover new opportunities for personal growth. I learned the value in creating a schedule for myself; clearly my mind works in a very structured way, because I grew to love personalized calendars and lists for getting things done. I realized that these strategies would help me greatly in accomplishing goals in the future. 

Because I wasn’t able to do so on any sort of consistent basis, I began to appreciate how much I value exercising. Throughout the trip, I constantly felt weak and out of shape, and I hated the feeling. When I would get the chance to go for a run, I felt so much better, and that taught me that I really do need to make consistent exercise a priority in the future. I also learned how easy it is for me to eat terribly, especially when surrounded by various new and exciting foods, but how much I should resist the urge to indulge 24/7. I began thinking much more about how badly I wanted to become a vegetarian and why, and also grew to realize the value in putting effort into my cooking. I also began to get much more interested in politics and current events, both in the US and around the world, particularly in the countries we were visiting. I started to feel that it was increasingly important for me to be aware of these things and to try to truly understand how the world works, for better or for worse.

On a broader scale, I realized that in the past, I tended to make things more difficult than they needed to be. I was constantly rushing around, trying to get XY and Z done, but in the process, I was not able to appreciate or even think about why I was doing any of it. It will be a struggle, but I hope in the future this realization will help me resist the urge to unnecessarily complicate and clutter my life. Perhaps the greatest lesson of all, which I’ve already touched on a bit, was in the importance of mindfulness and self-education. I wouldn’t have thought about or realized any of the things I just talked about had I not been constantly questioning and seeking to understand my thoughts and emotions. I’ve realized how important it is to me to think consistently about why I’m doing the things I’m doing, and to question whether or not they are truly making me happy. Further, after reading books about the American food industry, US economic international relations and capitalism’s role in climate change, I saw the value in self-education. All of these topics were things I knew vaguely about, but because I hadn’t taken the time to educate myself about them, I never felt compelled to think deeply about or act on them. Once I began to learn more, I realized that educating yourself is a powerful and necessary tool in today’s society.

Granted, this doesn’t mean I think we had the perfect trip. I wish we had had more cultural experiences, and taken the time and initiative to interact with the locals more on a personal basis. I wish we had strayed further off the backpacker and tourist trail, and completely perfected our Spanish. I had hoped to stay in one place for several months, instead of focusing on seeing as many places as we could like we ended up doing. Although I thoroughly enjoyed the computer time, I wish towards the end we had spent a little more time in the great outdoors rather than in a coffee shop on our devices for hours. But alas, no one’s perfect and, therefore, no trip can be perfect. All in all, I have very few things I would change about how we spent the last year. It has all been a learning experience, hopefully one I will be able to draw from for the rest of my life. It’s time now to go home, but that doesn’t mean I plan to stop thinking about these things and reflecting on my experiences over this past year. Because of that, I can proudly say that at the end of it all, I have no regrets. 
