---
title: "On Wastefulness and Sustainable Living"
layout: post
date: 2016-01-07
tag:
writings3: true
show-info: true
---
*Fundo los Leones, Lakes District, Chile*

I have been working on a farm near Puerto Octay, Chile for just over two weeks now, and to say I’ve learned a lot would be an understatement. I’ve picked up on a few new things from doing the actual work here, such as how to weed and rake properly, recognize different fruits, vegetables and spices, paint exteriors and other things of that nature. In all honesty though, it is mostly just common sense work that I perhaps wouldn’t be doing except that I’m living on a farm where it needs to be done. My point is, I haven’t learned many new skills from the work itself, except being exposed to it and getting some physical labor out of it. 

However, I have learned an immense amount from both observing the lifestyle of the family here and seeing how all the pieces of the puzzle come together in the functionality of this place. If needed, they could be entirely self-sustainable on this farm – they have cows and chickens available to them (milk, cheese, eggs and income), all sorts of fruits and vegetables with a year-round variation, a beautiful home, seemingly limitless water pumped from the backyard, a compost system that goes right back into the garden for fertilizer, horses (recreation and income) and tons of land to develop whatever they’d like on. Not to mention they have absolutely amazing views, landscapes and natural activities all around. They could of course be even more self-sustaining. For example, they don’t have solar panels, water turbines or anything like that installed. But really, if some sort of crisis were to happen in the world, they would have everything they needed right here. It’s pretty inspiring, really, and this experience has opened my eyes to how naïve I am. Of course I’ve thought about where my food comes from to some extent, but when you’re eating an entire meal with several courses prepared solely from your own land productions, it raises these thoughts to another level. To know exactly how your food started out, was cultivated and was then prepared is empowering, and it’s fulfilling thinking that you could do it all yourself in your own backyard. I’ve thought about this notion abstractly in the past, but to see it done so concretely in front of me has been eye-opening. 

Further, the fellow volunteers who are here working with us have been immensely interesting to talk to and learn from. Both are great cooks, and one in particular is the definition of resourceful. He has been roaming around South America for over two years now in a Volkswagen van, fully equipped with nice cooking gear, sleeping arrangements and even a spot for his dog. While his way of life isn’t quite how I’d choose to lead mine, his notions of how to use the seemingly useless and his general thriftiness have been quite a shock to me. Perhaps it’s my urban upbringing, my social circle's lack of knowledge about sustainability or just my overall American-ness, but there have been countless times where I’ve thought to throw something away where he has stopped me and contended that he can surely use that for something. He’s even proven the point several times. He's made delicious meals in creative ways out of leftover food I thought was a goner, slept in a homemade tent with random materials found on the wayside, taught us how to seal jars of unused food for use weeks later and made his own yogurt every morning. From him, I’ve learned of new ways to do things. I’ve also gotten an idea of what it means to be self-sustaining, resourceful and creative when it comes to your way of life. There is no need to be anywhere near as wasteful as the majority of people are, yet we continue to operate this way because that’s what we know. It never occurred to me to think of using things in the way he naturally thinks about it, but after a couple weeks of seeing this in action, the wheels have started turning and I’m beginning to be more open-minded about what can be done with “extras”, “leftovers” and “unusables”. 

If the first step in the process of changing a well-established habit is recognition of its downsides, the second step is actually implementing the change you want. Through my short-lived attempts to change deep-seated habits, I have seen first hand that this step is incredibly difficult. Yet, if you’re able to do it, it can be immensely rewarding. With this in mind, I feel very motivated to make long-term changes in my lifestyle towards a more sustainable and less wasteful variety. At the same time, though, it’s a long time till I go home, and habits are especially hard to change the further away from the source of inspiration you are. While I may feel encouraged right now, this could easily fade into disinterest or simple forgetting when it comes time to actually make the changes. In order to try to combat this, I’ve made a list of some of the things I’d like to do when I’m back from the trip, set up with a stable routine and able to make some concrete lifestyle changes. Here’s to hoping I can implement at least a few of them.

1.    Start a garden. Plant things like: onions, peppers, strawberries, potatoes, chard, corn, raspberries, spices, peas, tomatoes, avocados, carrots, zucchini, cauliflower, broccoli, plums, peaches, blueberries, etc.
2.    Start composting. To feed said garden.
3.    Make homemade bread and try varieties with different types of flour.
4.    Make homemade jams and homemade juices.
5.    Eat as locally as possible, whether that means from my immensely lush and populated garden (fingers crossed) or just from the farmer’s market. 
6.    Think creatively when making food. Don’t let things go to waste. Shop consciously at the grocery store and buy simple. Look up new recipes to experiment with various flavors and foods. Use leftovers in new ways, rather than just re-heating them (e.g. lentil soup one night and lentil burgers the next). 
7.    Make homemade sauces, like mayo, sour cream, salad dressing, spicy salsa, etc.
8.    Read or attend talks about urban gardening/self-sustainability/gardening/ agriculture/shopping wisely/eating healthy or anything else of interest. 
9.    Spend time cooking and cultivating. Don’t let work, social engagements or the hustle and bustle of American life cause forgetfulness for how amazing it is to spend an hour or two preparing a nice meal, setting up a table, and eating and drinking products that you prepared by hand and heart. 

